Add basic req'd files and update README (#2)
stjude-dnb-binfcore/sc-atac-seq-bed-builder: README.md

<p align="center";">
  <img src="figures/img/DNB-BINF-Core-logo.png" alt="DNB-BINF-Core logo" width="560px" />
</p>
<p align="center";">

# Single cell ATAC seq BED builder

*This repo is currently under construction—stay tuned for updates!* 🚧

> This repo is a simple tool designed to generate BED files that can be added to a 10x scATAC seq reference genome. The three files generated by this pipeline are `blacklist.bed`, `promoters.bed`, and `enhancers.bed`. Including these three files with a 10x scATAC seq reference genome allows `blacklist_region_fragments`, `promoter_region_fragments`, and `enhancer_region_fragments` counts to be calculate and reported in the `singlecell.csv` output file generated when running `cellranger atac` to align 10x single cell atac seq data.

Author: See [4623407](https://github.com/stjude-dnb-binfcore/sc-atac-seq-bed-builder/pull/2/commits/4623407b6878c6252bb22af9762e2fad88a1248b)

> While 10x pre-built reference genomes used to include these BED files by default, they are no longer included in new reference genome releases and are not available for the pre-built `2020` and `2024` 10x scATAC reference genomes as of the [Cell Ranger ATAC 2.0 release](https://www.10xgenomics.com/support/software/cell-ranger-atac/latest/release-notes/release-notes#cell-ranger-atac-2-0-may-3-2021-4017ff).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 > - Note:
       Recent 10x pre-built reference genomes (2020 and 2024 releases) no longer include these BED files by default, starting with [Cell Ranger ATAC 2.0](https://www.10xgenomics.com/support/software/cell-ranger-atac/latest/release-notes/release-notes#cell-ranger-atac-2-0-may-3-2021-4017ff).
```

> ### Key Features

Author: See [4623407](https://github.com/stjude-dnb-binfcore/sc-atac-seq-bed-builder/pull/2/commits/4623407b6878c6252bb22af9762e2fad88a1248b)

> This tool will allow users to generate properly formatted BED files for any pre-built or custom reference genome by providing an input BED file of blacklist regions (or excluded regions) for the reference genome of interest and a GFF file of regulatory regions for the reference genome release of interest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tool will allow users to generate properly formatted BED files for any pre-built or custom reference genome:

- A BED file of blacklist (excluded) regions, and
- A GFF file of regulatory regions for your genome release of interest.
```

Author: See [4623407](https://github.com/stjude-dnb-binfcore/sc-atac-seq-bed-builder/pull/2/commits/4623407b6878c6252bb22af9762e2fad88a1248b)

### Why Are These BED Files Important?
BED files for promoters, enhancers, and blacklist regions play a key role in scATAC-seq analysis:

**Functional Annotation of Peaks:**

> Promoter and enhancer BED files allow annotation of ATAC-seq peaks, helping identify which accessible regions correspond to gene regulatory elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Promoter and enhancer BED files enable annotation of ATAC-seq peaks, identifying accessible regions that correspond to key regulatory elements.
```

Author: See [4623407](https://github.com/stjude-dnb-binfcore/sc-atac-seq-bed-builder/pull/2/commits/4623407b6878c6252bb22af9762e2fad88a1248b)

**Quality Control Metrics:**

> Overlap with promoters and enhancers is used to assess data quality and biological relevance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overlap with promoters and enhancers provides metrics for data quality and biological relevance. 
```

Blacklist regions help filter out artefactual signals and improve overall data quality.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Integration with scATAC-seq Pipelines

The Single Cell ATAC-seq BED Builder is a companion tool to [scEpiGenie](https://github.com/stjude-dnb-binfcore/sc-epigenie), designed to support the analysis of single-cell ATAC-seq data from 10x Genomics. Single Cell ATAC-seq BED Builder can be used independently or seamlessly integrated into the scEpiGenie workflow to generate the necessary BED files for downstream analysis.

```

Author: See [4623407](https://github.com/stjude-dnb-binfcore/sc-atac-seq-bed-builder/pull/2/commits/4623407b6878c6252bb22af9762e2fad88a1248b)

<p align="center";">
  <img src="figures/img/DNB-BINF-Core-logo.png" alt="DNB-BINF-Core logo" width="560px" />
</p>
<p align="center";">

# Single cell ATAC seq BED builder

*This repo is currently under construction—stay tuned for updates!* 🚧

## Overview
This repository provides a simple tool for generating BED files—`blacklist.bed`, `promoters.bed`, and `enhancers.bed`—that can be incorporated into a 10x Genomics scATAC-seq reference genome. Including these files enables Cell Ranger ATAC to calculate and report `blacklist_region_fragments`, `promoter_region_fragments`, and `enhancer_region_fragments` in the `singlecell.csv` output when aligning 10x single-cell ATAC-seq data.

 > - Note:
       Recent 10x pre-built reference genomes (2020 and 2024 releases) no longer include these BED files by default, starting with [Cell Ranger ATAC 2.0](https://www.10xgenomics.com/support/software/cell-ranger-atac/latest/release-notes/release-notes#cell-ranger-atac-2-0-may-3-2021-4017ff).

## Key Features

> This tool will allow users to generate properly formatted BED files for any pre-built or custom 10x scATAC-seq reference genome: 

Author: @AntoniaChroni after checking this section again, I realized my original description was unclear about what were the input and output files, so to I updated this section a bit more with lists of inputs and outputs. See [6e545ee](https://github.com/stjude-dnb-binfcore/sc-atac-seq-bed-builder/pull/2/commits/6e545eed8b40acfff9aee0ed668cba91faaa2836).

- A BED file of blacklist (excluded) regions, and
- A GFF file of regulatory regions for your genome release of interest.

## Why Are These BED Files Important?
BED files for promoters, enhancers, and blacklist regions play a key role in scATAC-seq analysis:

> **Functional Annotation of Peaks:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- **Functional Annotation of Peaks:**

```

Promoter and enhancer BED files enable annotation of ATAC-seq peaks, identifying accessible regions that correspond to key regulatory elements.

**Quality Control Metrics:**

> Overlap with promoters and enhancers provides metrics for data quality and biological relevance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Overlap with promoters and enhancers provides metrics for data quality and biological relevance.

```
